Left brain interpreter
======================

In neuropsychology the left brain interpreter refers to the construction of
explanations by the left brain in order to make sense of the world by
reconciling new information with what was known before. The left brain
interpreter attempts to rationalize, reason and generalize new information it
receives in order to relate the past and the present.

Left brain interpretation is a case of the lateralization of brain function
that applies to "explanation generation" rather than other lateralized
activities. Although the concept of the left brain interpreter was initially
based on experiments on patients with split brains, it has since been shown to
apply to the everyday behavior of people at large.

The discovery
-------------

The concept was first introduced by Michael Gazzaniga while he performed
research on split-brain patients during the early 1970s with Roger Sperry at
the California Institute of Technology. Sperry eventually received the 1981
Nobel Prize in Medicine for his contributions to split-brain research.

In performing the initial experiments, Gazzaniga and his colleagues observed
what happened when the left and right hemispheres in the split brains of
patients were unable to communicate with each other. In these experiments when
patients were shown an image within the right visual field (which maps to the
left brain hemisphere), an explanation of what was seen could be provided.
However, when the image was only presented to the left visual field (which
maps to the right brain hemisphere) the patients stated that they didn't see
anything.

However, when asked to point to objects similar to the image, the patients
succeeded. Gazzaniga interpreted this by postulating that although the right
brain could see the image it could not generate a verbal response to describe
it.

Decades of experiments
----------------------

Since the initial discovery, a number of more detailed experiments have been
performed to further clarify how the left brain "interprets" new
information to assimilate and justify it. These experiments have included the
projection of specific images, ranging from facial expressions to carefully
constructed word combinations, and functional magnetic resonance (fMRI)
tests.

Many of the studies and experiments build on the initial approach of Gazzaniga
in which the right hemisphere is instructed to do things that the left
hemisphere is unaware of, e.g. by providing the instructions within the visual
field that is only accessible to the right brain. The left brain interpreter
will nonetheless construct a contrived explanation for the action, unaware of
the instruction the right brain had received.

The typical fMRI experiments have a "block mode", in which specific behavioral
tasks are arranged into blocks and are performed over a period of time. The
fMRI responses from the blocks are then compared. In fMRI studies by
Koutstaal the level of sensitivity of the right visual cortex with respect to
the single exposure of an object (e.g. a table) on two occasions was measured
against the display of two distinct tables at once. This contrasted with the
left hemisphere's lower level of sensitivity to variations.

Although the concept of the left brain interpreter was initially based on
experiments on patients with split brains, it has since been shown to apply to
the everyday behavior of people at large.

Reconciling the past with the present
-------------------------------------

The drive to seek explanations and provide interpretations is a general human
trait, and the left brain interpreter can be seen as the glue that attempts to
hold the story together, in order to provide a sense of coherence to the mind.
In reconciling the past and the present, the left brain interpreter may confer
a sense of comfort to a person, by providing a feeling of consistency and
continuity in the world. This may in turn produce feelings of security that
the person knows how "things will turn out" in the future.

However, the facile explanations provided by the left brain interpreter may
also enhance the opinion of a person about themselves and produce strong
biases which prevent the person from seeing themselves in the light of reality
and repeating patterns of behavior which led to past failures. The
explanations generated by the left brain interpreter may be balanced by right
brain systems which follow the constraints of reality to a closer degree.

The checks and balances provided by the right brain hemisphere may thus avoid
scenarios that eventually lead to delusion via the continued construction of
biased explanations. In 2002 Gazzaniga stated that the three decades of
research in the field had taught him that the left hemisphere is far more
inventive in interpreting facts than the right hemisphere's more truthful,
literal approach to information management.
